              ANNOUNCING TAMU-1.0D Linux Release

DESCRIPTION:

  TAMU-1.0D is the latest release in the TAMU linux series.  Like the
previous release, this one includes both *full* source and binary
sets.  The source set is an integrated BSD style source tree with the
*entire* binary set created from a single top level make in this tree.
make. This ensures that all programs are compiled and linked with the
same current tools and libraries, and guarantees availability of
working source for every program in the binary set.
 In addition, the boot diskette fully automates the installation
process, including partitioning, lilo bootstrapping, and network
configuration.  Installation requires no rebooting, and requires the
user to know only the host's name and IP address.  At every step of
installation, the program provides intelligent defaults, making it
a snap for novices, while allowing experts full flexibility in setting
installation parameters.
  This release has had several months of beta testing (.99p15.., 1.0,
1.0A), fixing hundreds of bugs that were in prior TAMU releases, and
adding significant new features.
  The end of this announcement gives a detailed list of the contents
of this release. Highlights include: linux-1.0, libc-4.5.21, XFree86-2.1,
chimera-1.50 (a mosaic clone that does not need motif), fvwm-1.22f, 
xfm-1.3 (now with shaped pixmaps), ghostscript-2.6.1, and tcl/tk with
xf (an automated gui application builder).

AVAILABILITY:

  The binary and source sets are available in both 3.5 and 5.25"
labeled diskette images. The sets are also available as individual tar 
files or packages.  All files are at:
	net.tamu.edu (128.194.177.1), in the directory
	pub/linux/TAMU-1.0D

REQUIREMENTS:

  The binary set includes 1 boot, and 21 bin diskette images, and the
source set includes 37 diskette images (22 and 44 respectively for 5.25
inch diskettes).  When installed, the binary set needs about 90MB of
disk space (this includes swap and filesystem overhead).  The sources
take an additional 200MB, and need around another 50MB temporarily
during compilation.  Individual packages within the sources can be
compiled independently, so you don't have to retrieve all 200MB to
modify one program.  The source packages have, however, been configured
to compile under the TAMU-1.0D binary set, so there are no guarantees
they will compile on other systems.

PHILOSOPHY:

  The source release is based on an integrated set of source packages.
This combines the advantages of a BSD style fully integrated release
(single top level make ...), with the flexibility of separate source
packages (it's easy to drop in new versions as they appear).
  This release is FSSTND compliant, with only a few minor exceptions.

CONTACTS:

Please send questions, comments, and bug fixes to:
	dave safford
	dave.safford@net.tamu.edu

DETAILED CONTENTS:

XFree86-2.1 Xlock a2ps archie-1.4.1 as86 at-2.5 base bash-1.13.5
bind-4.8.3l binutils-1.9l.3 bison-1.19 boot bootpd-2.1a bootutils-0.1
bwnfsd chimera-1.50 cron-3.0.1 diff-2.1 e2fsprogs-0.5 efsprogs
elvis-1.7 emacs-19.22 file-1.25 fileutils-3.4 find-3.8 finger-5.22
fingerd-5.6 flex-2.3.7 fromto ftp-5.9 ftpd-5.6 fvwm-1.22f gas-1.38.1l
gawk-2.15.2 gcc-2.5.8 gdb-4.6 ghostscript-2.6.1.p4 gprof grep-1.6
groff-1.08 gzip-1.2.3 inetd-5.3 init ispell-4.0 kbd-0.83 kermit
kmem-ps-0.99.14 ld.so-1.4.3 ld86 less-177 libc-4.5.21 lilo-14 linux-1.0
lpd-5.12 make-3.70 man-1.1 modutils-0.99.15 moxftp-2.0 mtools-2.0.5
ncurses-0.7.2 net-032 net2pch nfsd-1.4 nntpd-1.5.11 patch-2.0.12u8
pbmplus10dec91 pcnfsd-1.4 perl-4.036 ping-5.9 poeigl-1.21 popd-1.001
pwd rcp-5.32 rlogin-5.33 rlogind-5.53 routed-5.23 rpc-0.9 rsh-5.24
rshd-5.38 ruptime-5.7 rwho-5.5 rwhod-5.19 rzsz-9202 sed-1.13 seyon-2.12
shadow-3.3.1 shellutils-1.8 smail-3.1.28 strace-2 talk-5.5 talkd-5.8
tamu_install tamu_src tar-1.11.1 tcl-7.3 tk-3.6 tcpd-1.4 tcpdump
tcsh-6.03 telnet-5.52 term-1.11 textutils-1.4 tftp-5.1 tftpd-5.13 time
tools-2.10 tput-1.0 traceroute umail-360 usr.dict usr.man utila-1.5
utilb-1.3 utile-1.5 vgaset wmail-401c wnews-402 x3270-3.0.1.3 xdos-03f
xf-2.3 xfm1.3 xinvaders.p2 xsol xpm-3.4a xtetris-2.5.2 xxgdb-1.06
