FILES
-----
 
In order to make the text changes permanent, you must save them to a file.
If you do not save them, the changes will "disappear" when you leave
Origami.  As you make changes, i.e., corrections, deletions, insertions,
etc., they are actually written to a "scratch" copy of the file and the
changes to this file will not affect the "master" copy of the file until a
file save is specified.  This allows you to decide if changes made to the
file should be made permanent or discarded.  Note that a file fold will be
automatically saved, if you exit it.

Remember:  The file name appears on the mode line.

=* Origami 1.5.7 (Emacs,None) == search ==================================
                                 ------
 
The commands for reading and saving files are unlike the other commands
you have learned so far in that they consist of two characters - a C-X
followed by another character which specifies the file command to be
executed.

To read a file, type C-X C-F.  Origami will then prompt you from the
communication line for the name of the file.  In response to the prompt,
type the file name followed by a <Return> to indicate the file name has
been entered.  This command will tell Origami to go find this file and
load it.  Its contents will then be displayed on the screen and you will
be able to edit the file's contents.

To save any changes made to the file, type C-X C-S.  This tells Origami to
create a new version of the file which includes the changes you have made.
When the save is complete, a message will appear in the communication
line.

If you edit a file and at some point decide to quit (i.e., C-X C-C) without
saving the changes, Origami will remind you that changes have been made to
the file and ask you if you really want to quit.  Enter "N" to return to
Origami or "Y" to exit Origami without saving the changes.

To create a file, just edit it "as if" it already existed.  Then start
typing in the text.  When you ask to "save" the file, Origami will really
create the file with the text that you have entered.  From then on, you
can consider yourself to be editing an existing file.

It is not easy for you to test editing a file and continue with the
tutorial.  But you can always come back into the tutorial by starting it
over and skipping forward.  So, when you feel ready, you should try
editing a file named "FOO", putting some text in it, and saving it; then
exit Origami and look at the file to be sure that it worked.  If you have
the possibility, just use another terminal or window.
