
ANNOUNCE: BINARIES UPLOADED!

Bug reports and comments to: faith@cs.unc.edu

NEW IN THIS RELEASE, as of Fri Jan 29 09:30:05 1993.  Unless otherwise
noted, all binaries will untar into /usr/bin: cd /; gtar zpxvf filename.taz


gzip082A.Notes
gzip082A.taz

    This is GNU gzip 0.8.2, which acts like compress, but which has better
    compression ratios.  It contains gzip, gunzip, zcat, zcmp, zdiff,
    zmore, znew, and uncompress.  The znew utility converts *.Z files to
    *.z files.  All of the z* and uncompress utilities will now handle *.Z
    and *.z files.  Pack format files can now be uncompressed.  Has man and
    info pages, binaries in /bin.  [You may have to remove some of the
    compress links in /bin for the tar file to unpack correctly.]


mk363B.Notes
mk363B.taz

    Changes from 'A': Patch from roland@gnu.ai.mit.edu (Roland McGrath) to
    correct the problem of environment variable expansion breaking default
    built in rules.

    This is GNU make 3.63, with man and info pages.  WARNING: Variables are
    no longer automatically exported to the environment when a sub-make is
    started.  The .EXPORT_ALL_VARIABLES: rule or the export directive can
    be added to top level makefiles to get the old behavior.


WHAT YOU GET WITH THESE BINARIES:

*.Notes files contain instructions for installing the binary release, and
include step by step instruction of how I built the binary release from
source.  This single file contains the name of the ftp site where I got the
package, how I compiled it, and what patches were needed, if any.  IF YOU
WANT TO COMPILE THE PACKAGE YOURSELF, THIS FILE IS ALL YOU NEED (after you
get the original source distribution, of course).  If any patches were
necessary, the *.Notes file can be fed directly to patch(1), without any
editing.

*.taz files are compressed tar archives contain binaries, man pages and/or
info pages (if available), COPYING, README, etc., files from the original
source distribution, and my:

*.Notes file, described above
*.Dist  file, which was used to built the *.taz file
*.Unins file, which will uninstall most of the binary release (it leaves
              /usr/src/* intact)

The *.taz format files are compatible with the SLS systinstall program,
which can be used to install and uninstall the binary distributions.

If you don't use the SLS program, the *.taz files are ready to 'gtar zpxvf'
into /.



WHY SOME OF THE BINARIES DUMP CORE:

New releases always use the most recent "official" kernel, compiler, and
libraries.  Currently, this is gcc 2.3.3, jump 4.2, and Linux 0.99.3.  Some
older binaries were prepared with gcc 2.2.2d7/jump 4.1, but were tested
with jump 4.2, and may require jump 4.2 to run (i.e., rcs56A.taz).  Often,
if the binary dumps core, an upgrade to the latest library and kernel
release will fix the problem.



WHERE YOU CAN GET THESE BINARIES:

*.Notes files are in the following places:
    ftp.cs.unc.edu:/pub/faith/linux/utils
    tsx-11.mit.edu:/pub/linux/sources/FSF
    sunsite.unc.edu:/pub/Linux/utils

*.taz files are in the following places:
    ftp.cs.unc.edu:/pub/faith/linux/utils
    tsx-11.mit.edu:/pub/linux/binaries/FSF
    sunsite.unc.edu:/pub/Linux/utils

The hard to find (i.e., non-GNU) sources are in the following places:
    ftp.cs.unc.edu:/pub/faith/linux/utils/sources
    tsx-11.mit.edu:?
    sunsite.unc.edu:?

Original source for FSF utilties are in the following places:
    prep.ai.mit.edu:/pub/gnu
    tsx-11.mit.edu:/pub/linux/sources/FSF/from_prep



WHAT'S OLD IN THIS RELEASE:

OLD IN THIS RELEASE, as of Sun Jan 24 14:44:43 1993.  Unless otherwise
noted, all binaries will untar into /usr/bin: cd /; gtar zpxvf filename.taz

agrep-2.04.tar.Z
agrp204A.taz
agrp204A.Notes

    This is Sun Wu and Udi Manber's agrep 2.04.  Has man page.  (The
    postscript papers on agrep are available from cs.arizona.edu:/agrep.)


arc521A.Notes
arc521A.taz

    This is SEA ARC 5.21, a standard DOS-compatible archiver/unarchiver.
    Has man page and notes.


bc102A.taz
bc102A.Notes

    This is GNU bc 1.02 (the GNU version is stand alone, and does not
    require dc for operation).  Has man page.


bsn119A.Notes
bsn119A.taz

    This is GNU Bison 1.19 (a yacc replacement).  Has man and info pages.


cpio22A.taz
cpio22A.Notes

    This is GNU cpio 2.2.  Contains cpio only.  Has man page.



diff20A.taz
diff20A.Notes

    This is GNU GNU diff 2.0, including diff, diff3, sdiff, and cmp (from
    textutils).  Has info pages.


fgrep11A.taz
fgrep11A.Notes

    This is GNU fgrep 1.1.  No documentation.


file-1.25.tar.Z
file125A.taz
file125A.Notes

    This is Ian Darwin's file 1.25, which H. Lu's magic numbers for Linux.
    Please note that the current file program in use by the 386bsd and
    Linux communities is about 5 years old.  This is the latest one.  Has
    man pages.


find37A.taz
find37A.Notes

    This is GNU find 3.7.  Contains find, xargs, locate, and locate support
    in /usr/lib.  Has man pages.


flex237A.taz
flex237A.Notes

    This is GNU flex 2.3.7.  Contains flex, libfl.a, and flex.skel.  Has
    man pages.


futl34B.Notes
futl34B.taz

    Changes from A: The binaries now untar into /bin.

    This is GNU File Utilities 1.34.  This file contains the following
    utilities: chgrp, chown, chmod, cp, d, dd, df, dir, du, install, ln,
    ls, mkdir, mkfifo, mknod, mv, rm, rmdir, touch, v, and vdir.  Has man
    pages, binaries in /bin.


gawk214A.Notes
gawk214A.taz

    This is GNU Gawk 2.14 (an awk replacement).  gawk passes all of its
    tests except those which involve floating point exceptions, which are
    still broken in Linux.  Has man and info pages.


grep16A.taz
grep16A.Notes

    This is GNU grep 1.6.  Contains grep and egrep.  Has man page.


grof106A.Notes
grof106A.taz

    This is GNU groff 1.06 (a nroff replacement).  This file contains the
    following utilities: addftinfo, afmtodit, geqn, gindxbib, glookbib,
    gpic, grefer, grodvi, groff, grog, grops, grotty, gsoelim, gtbl,
    gtroff, lkbib, pfbtops, psbb, tfmtodit, and gnroff.  The following
    macro packages are included: man, mandoc, mdoc, ms, me, mm, mmse, mps,
    mpspic, mpsatk, mtty, mdvi, and mpic.  Drivers for ascii, postscript,
    and dvi are included.  Has man pages.


indt16A.taz
indt16A.Notes

    This is GNU indent 1.6.  Has man page and info page.


less177A.taz
less177A.Notes

    This is GNU less 1.77.  Contains less, lesskey.  Has man pages and help.


m4-103A.taz
m4-103A.Notes

    This is GNU m4 1.0.0.  Has info pages.


man-1.1.tar.Z
man11B.taz
man11B.Notes

    This is John Eaton's man 1.1, with Rik Faith's makewhatis.  It contains
    man, manpath, apropos, whatis, and /usr/lib/makewhatis.  The makewhatis
    program includes patches similar to those by Mitchum DSouza, which
    allow compressed cat pages to be used to build a whatis database.  The
    bug fixes by Willem Kasdorp have been applied.  Please send me bug
    reports! Has man pages.


mk362A.Notes
mk362A.taz

    This is GNU make 3.62, with man and info pages.


ncompress-4.2.4.tar.Z
ncmp424A.Notes
ncmp424A.taz

    This is (N)compress 4.2.4 (an improved version of compress 4.1).  This
    untars into /bin, since it is a direct replacement for the currently
    distributed compress.  Has man pages.


p2012u8A.Notes
p2012u8A.taz

    This is GNU patch 2.0.12u8 with a man page.


rcs56A.taz
rcs56A.Notes

    This is GNU rcs 5.6.  Contains ci, co, indent, merge, rcs, rcsdiff,
    rcsmerge, rlog.  Has man pages and paper.  There are reports that this
    will not work with libc.so.4.1.


sed113A.taz
sed113A.Notes

    This is GNU sed 1.13.  No documentation.


shutl18B.Notes
shutl18B.taz

    Changes from A: The binaries now untar into /bin.

    This is GNU Shell Utilities 1.18.  This file contains the following
    utilities: [, basename, date, dirname, echo, env, expr, false, groups,
    id, logname, nice, nohup, pathchk, printenv, printf, sleep, stty, su,
    tee, test, true, tty, uname, who, whoami, yes.  Has man pages, binaries
    in /bin.


tar1111B.Notes
tar1111B.taz

    Changes from A: Includes my patches so that:
        1) gzip -d is called instead of uncompress -d for uncompressions
        2) gzip is used with the "z" flag (or the --gzip flag)
        3) compress is used with the "Z" flag
        4) if you don't have gzip installed, compress will be used

    This is GNU tar 1.11.1.  IT IS A FSF BETA RELEASE AND HAS NO
    DOCUMENTATION.  Be very careful with this, and look for the 1.12
    release to fix bugs and be more stable.


time14B.taz
time14B.Notes

    Changes from A: the "magnitude of order" bug has been fixed.

    This is GNU time 1.4, which provides more output that the standard
    shell builtin time.  Therefore, I've linked gtime to time, so that this
    command can be accessed.  Has info page.



tput10A.taz
tput10A.Notes

    This is GNU tput 1.0.  Has info page.


txutl14A.Notes
txutl14A.taz

    Changes with version 1.4: cmp removed (in diff), cksum and od added.

    This is GNU Text Utilities 1.4.  This file contains the following
    utilities: cat, cksum, comm, csplit, cut, expand, fold, head, join, nl,
    od, paste, pr, sort, split, sum, tac, tail, tr, unexpand, uniq, wc.
    Has man pages, binaries in /bin.


unz50p1A.Notes
unz50p1A.taz

    This is Info-ZIP's UnZip utility, 5.0p1, a standard DOS-compatible
    unarchiver, containing unzip, zipinfo, and funzip.  Has man pages.


utila-1.3.src.tar.Z
utila13.Notes
utila13.taz

    Changes from 1.2: uudecode and cal have been fixed.

    This is a random collection of NET-2 and other source code, including:
    banner, cal, chsh (which should be setuid to root, but isn't), clear,
    col, colcrt, colrm, column, hexdump, last, mesg, od, passwd (which is
    setuid to root), reset, script, strings, ul, uuencode, uudecode, and
    whereis.  EVERYTHING HAS A MAN PAGE!


utilb-1.0.src.tar.Z
utilb10.Notes
utilb10.taz

    This is a random collection of mostly custom Linux code, which, in
    general, should be in the /bin directory, including: ed, hostname,
    kill, ldd, login, more, setterm, wall, write.  EVERYTHING HAS A MAN
    PAGE!

    **********************************************************************

    BE VERY CAREFUL IF YOU DON'T HAVE libc.so.4.2 INSTALLED!  You may not
    be able to log in!  Check to be sure that the programs work in some
    directory OTHER THAN /bin, *BEFORE* YOU INSTALL THEM.  ESPECIALLY
    LOGIN!

    **********************************************************************


utile-1.1.src.tar.Z
utile11.Notes
utile11.taz

    Changes from 1.0: Has Linus's new fsck, Rick Sladkey's new mount (this
    binary does not have NFS support, but the source code does), and
    Michael K. Johnson's new setserial.

    This is a random collection of mostly custom Linux code, which, in
    general, should be in the /etc directory, including: agetty, clock,
    ctrlaltdel, doshell, fastboot, fasthalt, fdformat, fdisk, frag, fsck,
    halt, kbdrate, makehole, mkfs, mkswap, mount, ramsize, reboot,
    rdev,setfdprm, setserial, shutdown, simpleinit, swapdev, swapon,
    swapoff, sync, umount, update, and vidmode.  EVERYTHING HAS A MAN PAGE!
    Binaries in /etc.
    
    The rdev command can change your kernel image's boot device, swap
    device, ramdisk size, and video mode.  The agetty and simpleinit are
    the "standard" Linux getty and init, but you have to make the links
    yourself, since some people may be using the System V versions, and I
    didn't want the tar to clobber those.  PLEASE BE VERY CAREFUL WITH
    GETTY AND INIT, SINCE THEY CAN MAKE YOUR SYSTEM UNBOOTABLE!

    Most people will have copies of these programs in /bin, and may want to
    keep them there, instead of moving them to /etc (where many people,
    myself and a bunch of manuals included, believe section 8 utilities
    belong).  If you want to keep things in /bin, however, please get the
    source distribution and fix the paths in pathnames.h.  Otherwise,
    things like shutdown won't work correctly.

    **********************************************************************

    BE VERY CAREFUL IF YOU DON'T HAVE libc.so.4.2 INSTALLED!  You may not
    be able to log in!  Check to be sure that the programs work in some
    directory OTHER THAN /etc, *BEFORE* YOU INSTALL THEM.  ESPECIALLY
    AGETTY, SIMPLEINIT, MOUNT, SWAPON, and SYNC!

    **********************************************************************


zip19p1A.Notes
zip19p1A.taz

    This is Info-ZIP's Zip utility, 1.9p1, a standard DOS-compatible
    archiver, containing zip, zipnote, and zipsplit.  Has man page.


zoo210A.Notes
zoo210A.taz

    This is Rahul Dhesi's zoo 2.10, an archiver/unarchiver utility,
    containing zoo and fiz.  Has man pages.
